Early history
Origins
Jean-Luc Picard was born in La Barre, France on Earth to Yvette and Maurice Picard on July 13, 2305. (TNG: "Family", "Conundrum")

Despite Picard having been born in France, he had a distinct English accent. According to "Code of Honor", by the 24th century, French was considered an archaic language. Picard remembered French children's songs like "Frère Jacques", which he played on the Ressikan flute in "The Inner Light", and he spoke the language on numerous occasions. He also occasionally cursed "merde" in times of stress, such as in "The Last Outpost" and "Elementary, Dear Data", and spoke at least basic French, as demonstrated in "11001001" and "Remembrance". In 2399, Picard still spoke French occasionally, and even taught his dog Number One to answer to spoken French commands in "Remembrance". He also spoke it once to Guinan in "Mercy".
Childhood
He and his elder brother, Robert, spent their childhood tending to their family vineyards with their father. Concerned about the preservation of their familial values, Maurice and his wife educated their sons in the ancient traditions, avoiding, in particular, any superfluous technologies. (TNG: "Family")


Picard as a young boy

As a young boy, Jean-Luc watched his grandfather "[d]eteriorate from a powerful, intelligent figure to a frail wisp of a man, who could barely make his way home." (TNG: "Night Terrors")

He took piano lessons, but eventually gave it up because he dreaded performing in front of an audience. In his later life, he would regret doing so, because his playing used to please his mother. (TNG: "Lessons", "The Perfect Mate")

Picard had a loving relationship with his mother, Yvette Picard who often played games of hide and seek with him and encouraged him to "look up at the stars." (PIC: "The Star Gazer", "Monsters") Unfortunately, what young Jean-Luc took as mere flights of fancy, was mental illness. At some point in the early 2310s, Yvette lost Jean-Luc while they were playing hide and seek in the tunnels underneath their home. After finding Jean-Luc, whose foot had gotten stuck, Maurice Picard found Yevette and locked her in a room for the night for her safety. Yvette pleaded with Jean-Luc to let her out. He did and the next morning, he found his mother dead by suicide. (PIC: "Hide and Seek") Later, as an adult, he'd often picture her as an old woman, inviting him to have some tea with her, and telling him that they would have a "nice, long talk." (PIC: "Hide and Seek")

One of Picard's childhood heroes was Dixon Hill, a fictional private detective living in the early 20th century. (TNG: "The Big Goodbye")

A fascination of his that intrigued him well into adulthood was the ship in a bottle. As a boy, he built model airships, and even a model of a Promellian battle cruiser. (TNG: "Booby Trap"; PIC: "The Star Gazer", "Hide and Seek") Moreover, he was captivated by the Phoenix, mankind's first warp-capable vessel, which he admired "hundreds of times" at the Smithsonian, but was never able to touch. (Star Trek: First Contact)


Picard, reverted to the age of 12

In grade school, Picard remembered singing such children's songs as "Frère Jacques". (TNG: "Disaster") Like his nephew René, Jean-Luc wrote a ribbon-winning report on starships in school. (TNG: "Family") Later in life, he recalled reading about the ancient Bajoran civilizations in his fifth grade reader. (TNG: "Ensign Ro")

Although Maurice intended his sons to work at the vineyards, it became obvious very early that Jean-Luc knew he wanted to join Starfleet, something that his father would never condone, up until his death. (TNG: "Bloodlines") Jean-Luc would later remember that he devoted his childhood to that end, which was like skipping that age altogether. (TNG: "Suddenly Human") His brother would later note that Jean-Luc always sought higher standards, such as becoming president of his school and later a valedictorian and even an athletic champion. Robert was also jealous of seeing Picard being the favored son and getting away after his mischiefs. Sometimes Robert had to bully his younger brother. (TNG: "Family")

When Picard joined the poker game with his senior officers for the first time in 2370, he recalled that "actually, I used to be quite a card player in my youth." (TNG: "All Good Things...")

Starfleet career
Academy years

Cadet Picard during his Academy years

Picard caused "quite a stir" by leaving his family's generational vineyard and applying to Starfleet Academy. (TNG: "Family"; Star Trek Nemesis) Although he failed to gain entry on his first attempt, Picard succeeded in his second attempt in 2323. He subsequently became one of the most outstanding cadets in his class. (TNG: "Coming of Age", "The First Duty")

Picard's career at the Academy was difficult, at best – years later, Picard credited Academy groundskeeper Boothby with helping him develop a mature attitude. (TNG: "The First Duty"; VOY: "In the Flesh") Among Picard's friends at the Academy were Donald Varley, Cortan Zweller, Marta Batanides, and an acquaintance called "A.F.", whom he blamed for his failed semester of Organic Chemistry and whose initials Picard carved into Boothby's prized elm. (TNG: "Contagion", "The Game", "Tapestry")

Peter David's Star Trek novels state another Academy classmate of Picard's was Morgan Korsmo, who was later killed fighting the Borg just before the start of the Star Trek: New Frontier novels.
At the Academy, Picard developed an interest in archaeology. His professor, Galen, encouraged him to continue in this field, but Picard ultimately refused his offer of becoming an archaeologist. He would nevertheless keep his interest in the subject, and became to be considered quite knowledgeable in the field. (TNG: "The Chase", "Qpid") It was also during this time he took great interest in studying the Iconians. (TNG: "Contagion")

Picard also excelled in sports. He won the Starfleet Academy marathon in April 2323 on Danula II, becoming the first freshman to win the race. (TNG: "The Best of Both Worlds, Part II"; Star Trek Generations Picard family album) During a wrestling match, Picard caught a Ligonian with a reverse body lift and pinned him down in the first fourteen seconds. (TNG: "The First Duty")

According to the Star Trek: Starfleet Corps of Engineers eBook series, Captain David Gold was an upperclassman that freshman Picard beat in the Academy marathon.
During his sophomore year, Picard was assigned to training on Morikin VII where he had his first encounter with Nausicaans, who had an outpost on a nearby asteroid. (TNG: "Tapestry")

On April 4, 2327, Cadet Picard joined the Speed of Light Club after he flew three hundred-thousand kilometers per second in level flight on the cruiser USS Leondegrance, commanded by Captain Nyota Uhura. He was awarded a certificate celebrating this occasion. (PIC: "Remembrance", "The Star Gazer")


An Academy photo Picard kept in his study

Picard graduated at the top of his class. He recalled to Wesley Crusher in 2365 that, as he entered the ranks of being an officer, he was "green as hell. And oh, so cocky." (TNG: "Samaritan Snare") Several years after this, in 2379, Picard showed Beverly Crusher a photograph from his Academy days, asking, "remember him?" She replied that "he was a bit cocky, as I recall." By that point in his life, Picard considered his younger self as "a damn fool. Selfish, ambitious, very much in need of seasoning." (Star Trek Nemesis)

Picard, later told Boothby that if it wasn't for the groundskeeper, Picard would have never graduated. Boothby assured Picard that "you made a mistake. There isn't a man among us who hasn't been young enough to make one. […] You did what you had to do. You did what you thought was best. I just made sure that you listened to yourself." (TNG: "The First Duty")

Early Starfleet career

Ensign Picard stabbed

Shortly after graduation in 2327, Ensign Picard's promising career nearly ended abruptly while he was on shore leave at Farspace Starbase Earhart. During a bar brawl over a rigged game of dom-jot, he was stabbed through the heart by a Nausicaan, and had to undergo emergency surgery to replace his heart. He later related to Wesley Crusher that he laughed after looking down to see the knife protruding from his chest. This event helped him realize how fragile life could be, and thus made him more willing to take risks and make his mark in the universe, which he only realized when Q proposed him to change this event in 2369. (TNG: "Samaritan Snare", "Tapestry")

As an ensign, Picard was posted to the USS Reliant, where he served with Lieutenant Nakamura. (TNG-R: "The Measure Of A Man") Picard served on the night watch on board the Reliant. (PIC: "Broken Pieces") Also while an ensign, Picard was capable of detecting by ear variations in a ship's torque sensors, as such, he was capable of hearing a three micron misalignment. (Star Trek: Insurrection)

As a junior officer, Picard met Walker Keel at an exotic bar on Tau Ceti III, where the two became very close of friends; they later became friends with Jack R. Crusher and his fiancée, Beverly Howard. (TNG: "Conspiracy", "Journey's End", "Attached")

Picard demonstrated command abilities early in his career, in particular, when he led an away team on Milika III to save an ambassador. This incident would later be mentioned by Q as one of the crucial events forming Picard's personality. (TNG: "Tapestry")

As a young lieutenant, Picard attended the wedding of Sarek's son, where he briefly met Sarek and Spock for the first and only time before the 2360s. (TNG: "Sarek", "Unification I")

Caution was still in place during the writing of "Sarek" about dealing with characters from The Original Series, thus it is only implied that the son in question is Spock. (Star Trek: The Next Generation Companion (2nd ed., p. 127)) Picard's line in "Unification I" only states that he has met Spock before but does not explicitly state when that meeting occurred, though likely it would have been at the wedding. This wedding was portrayed in the early chapters of Josepha Sherman and Susan Shwartz's novel Vulcan's Heart.
In his career, prior to 2365, Picard had been transferred "dozens of times", each of which was preceded by what he called "the practice of the feast before the transfer." (TNG: "A Matter Of Honor")

By 2369, he had spent "thirty years of [his] life aboard starships". (TNG: "Rascals")

If taken literally, by the time of said statement, Picard would have had forty-two years of service in Starfleet – twenty-two as captain of the Stargazer and about six aboard the Enterprise-D) – leaving about two of those thirty years aboard starships and another twelve years of not serving aboard starships still unaccounted for.
Aboard the Stargazer

Picard on the bridge of the Stargazer some years after its loss

Picard was assigned as a helmsman aboard the USS Stargazer. In 2333, Picard assumed command of the vessel when the captain was killed on the bridge. Starfleet awarded Picard a promotion to the post of captain, making him one of the youngest Starfleet officers ever to attain the position. (TNG: "Tapestry") Picard remained in command of the Stargazer for twenty-two years. (TNG: "The Battle", "Relics", "Bloodlines")

The length of Picard's command of the Stargazer is from the Star Trek: The Next Generation Writers'/Directors' Guide. The year he took command is derived from "The Battle", in which it is stated Picard lost the Stargazer in 2355. His assuming command of the ship is depicted in the novel The Valiant, which portrays him as a lieutenant commander and the ship's second officer at the time.
In 2339, Picard last visited with his archaeology professor, Doctor Galen. At this time in his life, Picard was seriously considering a career in this field of science. (TNG: "The Chase")

In 2342, Picard dated a young woman named Jenice at the Café des Artistes in Paris. Unfortunately, he became afraid of a possible future relationship and stood up Jenice, who later married Paul Manheim. (TNG: "We'll Always Have Paris")

In 2346, Picard met Miranda Vigo on Earth while he was on shore leave; they were introduced by a mutual friend. Picard described it the as being involved for a short time, detailing that the affair was "all very romantic, very intense, probably because we both knew I would be leaving in two weeks." The two kept in touch for awhile, but never crossed paths again. (TNG: "Bloodlines")

During his time in command of the Stargazer Moritz Benayoun was his chief medical officer and undertook a mission to the Fireforest of Calyx. (PIC: "Maps and Legends")

During the Cardassian wars, the Stargazer was involved in a truce offering by the Federation. After making contact with a Cardassian warship, Picard lowered the ship's shields as a gesture of good will, but the Cardassian commander ignored the gesture and disabled the Stargazer's weapons and impulse engines. The Stargazer managed to regroup and flee. (TNG: "The Wounded")


Picard in the early 2350s at Starbase 32

In 2353, Picard was on an away mission when he saved the life of one team member at the expense of another; Jack R. Crusher was lost in the line of duty. Picard met with Crusher's widow, Beverly, on Starbase 32 to present the body; it was one of Wesley Crusher's earliest memories. (TNG: "Encounter at Farpoint", "Coming of Age", "The Bonding", "Violations")

In 2355, the Stargazer was seriously damaged in a battle with an unknown enemy vessel, later discovered to be a Ferengi ship. Picard managed to destroy the enemy vessel using the Stargazer's warp engines in a unique tactical maneuver (later named the "Picard Maneuver"), but was forced to abandon the Stargazer aboard a shuttlecraft, where he and the other survivors travelled for weeks through deep space before being picked up by passing Federation starship. (TNG: "The Battle")

His actions during the battle were called into question by Phillipa Louvois, an officer of the Judge Advocate General during his court martial, but he was exonerated by the inquiry board and was later awarded the Grankite Order of Tactics (Class of Excellence) for the development of the aforementioned "Picard Maneuver". (TNG: "The Measure Of A Man"; Star Trek Generations Picard family album)

The encounter with the Ferengi vessel, later known as the Battle of Maxia, eventually came back to haunt Picard. DaiMon Bok, whose son was killed in the battle, twice tried to exact revenge on Picard. (TNG: "The Battle", "Bloodlines")

Picard's next command found him responding to a distress call from colonists in the Carnelian minefield around 2363. During this mission he first met Natasha Yar. (TNG: "Legacy")

The novel The Buried Age filled in many of the gaps between Picard's command of the Stargazer and Enterprise that have otherwise been largely unexplored, including Picard's first meetings with Deanna Troi, Data, Natasha Yar, Kathryn Janeway, and Geordi La Forge.
Commanding the USS Enterprise-D

Picard, shortly after taking command of the Enterprise

In 2363, Picard was assigned command of the newly commissioned Galaxy-class starship USS Enterprise-D, the most prestigious captaincy in Starfleet. He commanded the flagship for eight years, participating in many important missions. Among these were the defeat of the Borg invasions of 2366 and 2373, and his command of the fleet which blockaded the Klingon-Romulan border during the Klingon Civil War.


"Let's see what's out there… "

Picard hand-picked most of his senior staff, such as two young officers who impressed him enough upon first meeting. Geordi La Forge once piloted Picard's inspection tour shuttle and stayed up all night to refit an engine part Picard had made a passing comment on, and Picard witnessed Natasha Yar risk her life to save colonists amid a Carnelian minefield. He had also picked William T. Riker as his first officer and promoted him to commander sight unseen, impressed by the young officer's record of independence. (TNG: "The Next Phase", "Legacy", "The Pegasus"; PIC: "The Star Gazer" commemorative plaque)

Mere months after taking command, Picard was offered a promotion to commandant of Starfleet Academy with the rank of admiral by Admiral Gregory Quinn, but turned it down to retain command of the Enterprise. (TNG: "Coming of Age")


Picard on the bridge of the Enterprise in 2370

Although Picard often heatedly defended a strict interpretation of the Prime Directive, he broke it numerous times when he felt it was warranted. Thus, in 2364, he allowed an Edo woman to confront her "god" from space, and in 2366, Picard brought a Mintakan leader aboard the Enterprise to undo the damage done by cultural contamination. (TNG: "Justice", "Who Watches The Watchers", "The Drumhead") Furthermore, in 2370, the Enterprise, by hand of Dr. Nikolai Rozhenko, transported a primitive group of Boraalans into a holodeck from Boraal II before an atmospheric dissipation rendered it uninhabitable. Although in violation of the Prime Directive, Picard ordered that the Boraalans be stealthily resettled, having no other humanitarian options. (TNG: "Homeward")

In 2369, when the Enterprise was undergoing a baryon sweep at the Remmler Array, Picard uncovered a plan, by mercenaries, to steal toxic waste from the ship's warp core. He managed to take out all of the intruders by setting traps throughout the various sections of the ship. He even used the Vulcan nerve pinch technique on Devor. (TNG: "Starship Mine")

Encounters with the Q entity
Commanding the Enterprise on her first mission, Picard made first contact with a member of the Q Continuum – Q. Picard and his senior officers had to stand trial for Humanity's immaturity. To prove their worthiness as a species, Picard had to solve the "mystery of Farpoint Station." The crew of the Enterprise discovered that the inhabitants of Deneb IV, the Bandi, had captured a space-dwelling being to serve their own purpose. The Enterprise helped to free the creature, and Q, somewhat disappointed by the crew's success, retreated, though he hinted that it would not be their final encounter. (TNG: "Encounter at Farpoint")


Q explains to Picard that how Humans respond to a game tells him more about them than a direct confrontation would

Thus, later that year, Q created a bizarre and deadly "game" for the crew of the Enterprise in order to demonstrate that he had given Riker Q-like abilities. Ultimately, Riker rejected these new powers, and Q again disappeared. (TNG: "Hide And Q") One year later, in 2365, Q first expressed an interest in joining Picard's crew. When Picard declined, Q tried to show how much he could be of assistance by hurling the Enterprise into the path of a Borg cube. Q was hoping to show that the Federation was entirely unprepared to meet some of the more powerful races that existed in the universe. Ultimately, Picard had to beg for Q's help in escaping from the pursuit of the Borg vessel. (TNG: "Q Who")

A fourth encounter with Q occurred in 2366, when the other members of the Continuum had stripped him of his omnipotence and immortality as punishment for his irresponsibility. He sought refuge on the Enterprise and, although Picard and the rest of the crew were initially unconvinced of the sincerity of Q's pleas, the captain agreed to provide Q temporary asylum. As the Enterprise began to suffer from Calamarain attack, Q resolved to end his life to prevent further risk to the Enterprise crew, but another member of the Q Continuum prevented Q from sacrificing himself, and restored his powers as a reward for his selfless act. (TNG: "Deja Q")

Late in 2367, Q returned to the Enterprise to "properly" thank Picard for his role in helping him regain his standing in the Continuum. At the time, Picard was meeting Vash, whom he had met on Risa the year before. Q resolved to teach Picard a lesson about love and cast the captain, Vash, and the Enterprise command crew into an elaborate scenario styled by the ancient legend of Robin Hood. Q himself assumed the role of the High Sheriff of Nottingham. Ultimately, Picard learned his lesson, and everyone was returned to the Enterprise. Intrigued by Vash, though, Q offered to take her on a journey of exploration to explore various archaeological ruins of the galaxy, and she accepted. (TNG: "Qpid")

In 2369, Q once again appeared aboard the Enterprise, this time to instruct Amanda Rogers, a Human who was the child of two Q and possessed Q powers herself. Although Q's petulant and acerbic attitude did little to ingratiate himself to Amanda, he eventually convinced her to go with him to the Continuum to learn to use her new-found abilities. (TNG: "True Q")

Later that same year, Q appeared to Picard when the latter was critically injured during an ambush from a group of Lenarians. Appearing as "God", Q told Picard that he had died because of his artificial heart, and offered him the chance to return to the incident in his youth, allowing him to relive the events leading up to his near-fatal injury and change history. Although Picard was successful in changing history, he eventually realized that the event – and his previous nature as an arrogant, brash young man – was a part of his identity, and had helped mold him into the successful Starfleet officer he had become. Although he was uncertain as to whether the experience had been real or simply a vision, Picard was grateful for Q's revelation. (TNG: "Tapestry")


"You don't get it, do you, Jean-Luc? The trial never ends."

In 2370, Q returned to the Enterprise to continue the trial against Humanity. Claiming that the seven-year-old trial had never actually ended, Q proclaimed Humanity guilty of "being inferior" and informed Picard that his race was to be destroyed. He sent Picard traveling through time to his past, present, and future, where he was presented with a temporal paradox in the form of an eruption of anti-time in the Devron system. In this paradox, Picard himself was responsible for the creation of the anomaly that propagated backwards in normal time (anti-time having the opposite properties of normal time), thus destroying Humanity in the past.

In addition to sending Picard jumping through time, Q also provided Picard with hints to understanding the nature of the paradox. Ultimately, Picard determined the solution and devised a way to close the anti-time anomaly in all three time periods. Following the captain's success, Q revealed that the entire experience had been a test, aimed at determining whether Humanity was capable of expanding its horizons to understand some of the advanced concepts of the universe. Departing, Q promised to continue watching Humanity, proclaiming that "The trial never ends." (TNG: "All Good Things...")

Encounters with the Borg

Abducted by the Borg in 2366

In 2365, Q sent the Enterprise 7,000 light years into uncharted space, into the path of a Borg cube. Although the Enterprise suffered losses, it became the first ship known by the Federation to survive an encounter with the Borg, and managed to inform Starfleet of the Borg's existence. (TNG: "Q Who")

One year later, in 2366, the Borg launched their first invasion of the Federation. A single cube destroyed the New Providence colony and the USS Lalo, and kidnapped Picard when the Enterprise attempted to intervene. Picard was partially assimilated and became a Borg drone known as Locutus of Borg. The cube proceeded towards Earth and engaged Starfleet in the Battle of Wolf 359, resulting in the destruction of 39 Federation vessels. On arrival at Earth, an away team from the Enterprise successfully rescued Picard and used his connection to the Borg to implant false data in the cube, destroying it. (TNG: "The Best of Both Worlds", "The Best of Both Worlds, Part II") It was revealed years later that his assimilation and time spent in the Collective had a profoundly disturbing effect on Picard's life. (Star Trek: First Contact) Unbeknownst to Picard or Starfleet, the Borg genetically altered Picard while he was Locutus, turning him into a receiver without the need for organic implants. This would result in Picard being able to hear the Borg Collective whenever they were in close proximity to him and later caused his physical death from what was misdiagnosed as Irumodic Syndrome. (PIC: "Vox")


Picard as Locutus of Borg, and the Borg Queen

The Enterprise again encountered the Borg in 2368 when they rescued a Borg drone from a crashed Borg shuttle. This drone was cut off from the Collective and slowly regained an individual identity, eventually being named Hugh. Initially, the plan was drafted to use Hugh to destroy the collective in its entirety, although Dr. Beverly Crusher resisted the extermination of an entire race – even if it was the Borg. Picard eventually confronted Hugh, who immediately recognized Picard as Locutus. Picard took the role of Locutus while talking to Hugh, to simulate the authority that Hugh was used to. Geordi La Forge, Data, Dr. Crusher, and other members of the Enterprise crew had a profound effect on the former drone. Even Guinan, who initially wanted nothing to do with Hugh, taught him that resistance is not futile. Guinan's homeworld had been destroyed long ago by the Borg, but the fact that Guinan was still alive was proof of this assertion.

When Picard reminded Hugh that "resistance is futile," Hugh informed him that it was not so. When Picard told Hugh that La Forge would be assimilated, Hugh stated that La Forge did not want to be assimilated. When Picard said that this was irrelevant, Hugh specifically said that he (and Hugh used the word "I") would not assist in the assimilation of La Forge. Picard was stunned that a Borg drone would say such things. He decided that he could not send Hugh back with the file that would destroy the Borg. Picard offered Hugh asylum on board the Enterprise, but Hugh said that the Collective would not stop looking for him until they found him. Hugh agreed to go back to the crash site and to be taken back into the Collective, to protect the Enterprise from harm. (TNG: "I Borg")

The individuality present in Hugh spread through the ship he returned to, causing a catastrophic separation of the ship from the rest of the Collective. This rogue mini-collective was unsure how to cope with its freedom, and so fell under the influence of the android Lore. Lore persuaded them to aid his plan to conquer Earth. Using the rogue ship, they attacked several outposts before being tracked down by the crew of the Enterprise-D. They destroyed the Borg ship and were able to persuade the remaining members of the mini-collective of Lore's unreliability. The mini-collective then disappeared into space and has not been encountered since. (TNG: "Descent", "Descent, Part II")

There were some within Starfleet who blamed Picard for the destruction of the task force at Wolf 359. Benjamin Sisko, who was serving as first officer of the USS Saratoga at the time, lost his wife Jennifer in the attack. Picard and Sisko finally met in 2369, after the Enterprise was the first Starfleet vessel to arrive at Deep Space 9. Sisko was, at first, hostile toward Picard, but later came to forgive him. Sisko also gave Picard his letter of resignation, which Picard did not send, feeling Sisko was the right person for command of Deep Space 9. (DS9: "Emissary")


Meeting the Borg Queen again

In 2373, the Borg launched their second invasion of the Federation, and again the crew of the Enterprise played a major role in their defeat. Initially, the Enterprise was not to have participated in the Battle of Sector 001, because according to Starfleet Command, Picard would bring an "unstable element into a critical situation." Seeing that the Borg were getting the best of the fleet, Picard ordered the Enterprise to Earth to assist. He was instrumental in defeating both the main invasion and an attempt by the Borg to prevent the formation of the Federation by altering history. (Star Trek: First Contact)

Kamin and the Ressikan probe

Picard plays his Ressikan flute in private

In 2368, the Enterprise encountered a space probe of unknown origin, which emitted a nucleonic beam directly at Picard. This led to his fainting and awakening on an unknown world where he was known as an ironworker named Kamin and was married to Eline. Picard later found out that Kamin was a member of the Ressik community on a planet called Kataan. For five years, Picard clung to his life aboard the Enterprise and searched for ways to return, but eventually settled into his life as Kamin, having two children with Eline and eventually a grandchild. In the approximately thirty-five years Picard spent as Kamin, he learned to play the Ressikan flute, dabbled in astronomy, and analyzed soil samples from the planet, eventually confirming that Kataan was a dying world.

Near the end of his life on Kataan, it was revealed to Picard that Kataan had been destroyed more than a thousand years previously, and the residents of the Ressik community had engineered the probe to share the memory and experiences of their people with someone who could then teach others about their civilization. He awoke on the Enterprise as Jean-Luc Picard once more and discovered that he had lived a lifetime in only twenty-five minutes. The probe was collected by the Enterprise and disassembled. A Ressikan flute was found inside the probe, which Riker then presented to Picard. (TNG: "The Inner Light")

Picard considered the flute to be one of his most prized possessions. As of 2379, he kept the flute on his desk in his ready room aboard the USS Enterprise-E. (TNG: "Lessons"; Star Trek Nemesis)

Picard playing the Ressikan flute file info
Loss of the Enterprise-D

Picard in command of the Enterprise-E

In 2371, the USS Enterprise-D was lost over Veridian III, with the vessel's primary hull crash-landing on the planet's surface. Picard also met the legendary James T. Kirk while in the Nexus with him, and recruited him in defeating and killing Dr. Tolian Soran before he could have the chance to destroy the Veridian system. The casualties were light aboard the Enterprise, and most of the ship's senior crew was reassigned to the USS Enterprise-E, the sixth Federation starship to bear the name. (Star Trek Generations; Star Trek: First Contact)

Commanding the USS Enterprise-E
Stopping the Borg
Picard was installed as commanding officer and given a new authorization code: "Picard-4-7-alpha-tango." After a one-year shakedown cruise, the new Enterprise was nearly lost when the senior staff decided to sacrifice the ship in order to save Earth's future by preventing the Borg on board from changing history. Fortunately, the crew was able to repel the Borg attempt without having to destroy the Enterprise. (Star Trek: First Contact)

The Ba'ku and the Son'a
Two years later, in 2375, Picard ordered the Enterprise-E to the Ba'ku planet in the Briar Patch when it appeared that his operations officer, Lieutenant Commander Data, had malfunctioned and assaulted members of the research team there. Picard was able to capture Data and uncovered a plot by Admiral Dougherty, the Son'a and some in the Federation Council to relocate the Ba'ku against their will. Picard rebelled against Dougherty, bringing word of his actions to the public. Picard was able to protect the Ba'ku and stop Son'a leader Ru'afo from destroying the Ba'ku's homeworld. (Star Trek: Insurrection)

Dealing with the Romulans

Picard and a dying Shinzon

Picard continued in command of the Enterprise through 2379, when the ship was sent to Romulus after the coup by Praetor Shinzon. Shinzon was a clone of Picard created by a former Romulan government – they intended to replace the captain with a spy of their own. Following a change of government and concern that it would lead to war, the plan was abandoned and Shinzon was sent to Remus to die. Instead, he prospered, becoming a highly successful leader during the Dominion War. Shinzon used a thalaron radiation weapon to eradicate the Romulan Senate and had planned to do the same to Earth. He needed Picard in order to repair faults in his own genetic makeup.

In a pitched battle between the Enterprise and Shinzon's flagship, the Scimitar, Picard was eventually able to board the enemy ship and eliminate Shinzon. Data saved Picard's life by transporting the captain back to the Enterprise before sacrificing his own life; he destroyed the Scimitar by firing on the thalaron weapon with a hand phaser, thereby saving the crew of the Enterprise. (Star Trek Nemesis)

Later career
In 2380, Q remarked that Picard was "no fun, he's always quoting Shakespeare, he's always making wine." (LD: "Veritas")

This reference to making wine may be anachronistic, as it precedes Picard's retirement to his vineyard. Alternatively, he may have started having a more active role in supervising vineyard activity long-distance while still aboard the Enterprise.
By 2381, Picard had been promoted to admiral and was substantially funding the work of independent archaeologist Petra Aberdeen as a patron of the Independent Archaeologists Guild. (LD: "The Stars At Night")


Admiral Jean-Luc Picard in 2381

Picard would meet Riker for a celebratory drink to toast Riker and Troi's newborn son Thaddeus. Riker informed Picard of the touch-and-go delivery and how Riker felt like he was about to lose his son then. (PIC: "Seventeen Seconds")

According to the press kit for PIC Season 1, Picard left the Enterprise and was promoted to admiral in 2381, to assist the Romulan people. [1] This is also supported by the picture of Picard wearing his admiral's uniform while holding Thaddeus Troi-Riker, who was born in 2381 and clearly not quite 1 year old. (PIC: "Nepenthe")
By 2385, he was tasked with developing a fleet of ships to help rescue the populations of Romulus and other worlds of the Romulan Star Empire that were within the blast radius of an impending supernova. The Romulan government had requested the Federation's aid in this. (PIC: "Remembrance")

In a log on the "Star Trek: Prodigy Logs" Instagram account, set after the events of PRO: "Crossroads", Vice Admiral Kathryn Janeway mentions Picard being involved with evacuation dealings with Romulans; given the timeframe of said log, it would seem Picard had been working on these efforts since at least 2384. She mentions that if she had pursued the USS Protostar into the Romulan Neutral Zone, it could have compromised Federation-Romulan relations and that "Jean-Luc would've never forgiven [her]." [2]
Sometime later, Picard had managed to help get some of the Romulan refugees to Vashti, in the Beta Quadrant. He visited the planet several times and on one occasion, brought Elnor, a young Romulan boy he had befriended and placed under the care of the Qowat Milat, a copy of the book The Three Musketeers, and on April 5, 2385, began to teach him to fence. During the lesson, Raffi Musiker informed him that the rescue fleet under construction on Mars was under attack by rogue Synths. Picard, shocked at the news, bid farewell to the Qowat Milat and told them that he would try everything within his power to make sure the rest of their people could be saved. (PIC: "Absolute Candor")


Admiral Picard speaks with Commander Musiker about his meeting with the Federation Council

The attack destroyed not only all the ships of the rescue fleet but also Utopia Planitia Fleet Yards and ignited the stratosphere for years to come, rendering the terraformed planet uninhabitable. Picard called the attack, which cost over 92,000 lives, "devastating" in a Federation News Network broadcast at the time. Following this, the Federation chose both to enact a ban on the creation of synthetic lifeforms and to cancel the Romulan evacuation, dooming the majority of the population to death by the eventual supernova in 2387. Picard met with the Federation Council with a plan for a new fleet, with "mothball ships" and significantly fewer officers but believed the evacuation could still work, he gave the council a choice: his new fleet or his resignation.

In truth, his threat to resign from Starfleet was the last, desperate card Picard had to play to continue the evacuation plan, and he was stunned when the council simply accepted it. Picard called the ban on synths "a mistake." His resignation angered Raffi Musiker, who had believed in his idea and suspected possible Tal Shiar involvement in the attack on Mars. (PIC: "Remembrance"; ST: "Children of Mars"; PIC: "The End is the Beginning"; Star Trek)

Retirement
Following his resignation, Picard returned to his childhood home in France where he lived a pleasant but unfulfilling life. Living with him were two Romulan refugees Laris and Zhaban who joined his household about four years later, and also his dog Number One. He spent the next twelve years writing history books and tending to the vineyard. As the years wore on, Picard started to be plagued with dreams of Data and the destruction of Mars. (PIC: "Remembrance")

Zhat Vash mystery

Picard meets Dahj

In 2399, now ninety-four years old, Picard was sought out by Dahj Asha, an android created from the remaining neural code from Lieutenant Commander Data. After having a dream about Data painting, Picard went to his vault inside the Starfleet Archive Museum to inspect a painting that Data had given him in 2369. The woman in the painting looked exactly like Dahj, and since Data had named the painting "daughter", Picard concluded that Dahj must be an android, too. Dahj found Picard outside the archive, where he explained to her what he had learned. They were chased by Romulan operatives and Dahj was killed. Picard sought out cyberneticist Dr. Agnes Jurati at the Daystrom Institute to find more information about the deceased young woman. Jurati told him that Bruce Maddox might have managed to create androids based on Data's code, including Dahj and a "twin" sister. (PIC: "Remembrance")

Back at Château Picard, Laris, Picard, and Zhaban reviewed the security footage from Starfleet Headquarters where Dahj was killed. The computer told them that there was no trace of Dahj. This led Laris to believe that the Tal Shiar or even the Zhat Vash were behind the attack and were covering up their tracks. Soon after, Picard and Laris investigated Dahj's apartment in the greater Boston area. They discovered that their fears were true and the Zhat Vash were behind the events that were unfolding. Later that night, Dr. Moritz Benayoun visited Picard to inform him that he could not clear Picard for interstellar travel. Picard had passed all the tests Starfleet required, save for the abnormality in his parietal lobe. Picard went to Starfleet Headquarters to speak with Fleet admiral Kirsten Clancy to be reinstated and given a small ship and crew to track down Maddox and the second android. Still angered by the interview Picard gave only days before condemning Starfleet for abandoning the Romulan Rescue, Clancy denied his request. Later, Picard was visited by Dr. Jurati who informed him that Dahj's background had been created within the last few years, and there was no record of her before that time. Picard sought the help of his former first officer, Raffi Musiker, to find an unregistered ship and off the books pilot he could hire to help him track down Bruce Maddox and solve the Zhat Vash mystery. (PIC: "Maps and Legends")


Picard orders Rios to head to warp

Picard was able to get Musiker to agree to help after having a heart-to-heart with her. He apologized for letting her down and not being there when she needed him most. She put him in contact with Cristóbal Rios, the experienced pilot and CO of La Sirena. Picard beamed aboard Rios's ship, where he met the captain and his Emergency Medical Hologram. Picard and Rios discussed the latter's past with Starfleet and the job Picard was offering, which Rios seemed willing to accept. Back at the Château, Picard revealed to Laris that he never really felt at home at the vineyard and always felt he was best suited for life out among the stars. After Zhaban entered with provisions for Picard's journey, the three were attacked by Zhat Vash agents. They managed to defend themselves and dispatch the attackers. When a straggler came into the room after the main group, trying to shoot Picard, he was killed by Agnes Jurati, who had showed up unannounced. Jurati told Picard that Commodore Oh visited her and asked her about her conversations with him. Picard then interrogated one of the Romulan attackers and learned that they believed that Soji was "the Destroyer", "the end of all". Before Picard and the others could learn more, the Romulan agent committed suicide with an acid capsule hidden in his teeth. Moments later, Rios called Picard to warn him of more trouble headed his way. Dr. Jurati convinced Picard to take her along on his mission, and the two beamed aboard La Sirena. To Picard's surprise, he found that Musiker was there, too. She told Picard that, based on the information he gave her, she had discovered that Bruce Maddox was on Freecloud. Picard ordered Rios to jump to warp to begin their mission. (PIC: "The End is the Beginning")


Picard speaks with Elnor on Vashti

A short while into the mission, Picard decided to have Rios change course to Vashti. Ostensibly, he wished to visit the Qowat Milat, an all female order of Romulan warrior nuns, and find a qalankhkai, a sworn blade, to join his cause. Musiker suspected he was really looking for Elnor, a young Romulan Picard had developed paternal feelings towards during the Romulan Rescue Mission. Musiker informed Picard that Vashti had become grimmer since he had last visited, and the destruction of the Romulan homeworld left many with bitter feelings towards the Federation. Once on Vashti, Picard reunited with the Qowat Milat. He was surprised to find Elnor still living among them. Elnor, who had once admired Picard, was now feeling resentful since Picard had abandoned him and his people. Picard asked Elnor to become his qalankkhai, but Elnor refused. While waiting for a transporter window to return to the ship, Picard decided to have a drink in a tavern with a "Romulans Only" sign, which he tore down. A former Romulan senator confronted Picard about the failures of the Federation, and escalated the conflict to a physical fight. Picard refused to fight the man, and was saved by Elnor, who declared himself Picard's qalankkhai. Once the two of them were back on La Sirena, the ship was attacked by Kar Kantar, a local warlord commanding an old Romulan Bird-of-Prey. During the fight, a mysterious ship appeared to help but was nearly destroyed in the process. Once the Bird of Prey was disabled Picard, Rios, and Musiker beamed the pilot on board La Sirena, to discover it was Seven of Nine, who was working for the Fenris Rangers. As soon as she was safe on board, Seven quipped, "You owe me a ship, Picard." and passed out. (PIC: "Absolute Candor")


Picard in his bounty hunter disguise

Back en route to Freecloud, Seven and Picard met in his study on La Sirena's holodeck and discussed Picard's mission and Seven's work as a vigilante. Seven thought Picard was on a typical grandiose diplomatic mission, but when he told her he was trying to save someone who had no-one else to help her, Seven agreed to help him. Upon arriving at Freecloud, Picard and the others came up with a plan to extract Bruce Maddox from Bjayzl, the nightclub owner and ruthless merchant of Borg parts who was holding him prisoner. Picard played the part of a bounty hunter who offered Seven of Nine in exchange for Maddox. During the meeting, Seven revealed that she knew Bjayzl and was planning to kill her as revenge for Bjayzl killing Icheb, the ex-Borg who was like a son to Seven. Rios and Picard managed to de-escalate the situation and rescue Maddox. Back on La Sirena, Picard appealed to Seven not to try and seek revenge. Seven asked him if after his time in the Borg Collective he felt he had gained back his humanity. Picard admitted he did not think he had gained back all of it, "but we're both working on it, aren't we?" Seven agreed, but beamed back down to Freecloud to kill Bjayzl anyway. Later Picard met with Maddox in sickbay, and Maddox told him about Soji and revealed that she was on the Artifact. (PIC: "Stardust City Rag")


Picard and Hugh share a hug upon meeting again after many years

On the way to the Artifact, Jurati and Picard discussed the death of Bruce Maddox and Picard's past as Locutus of Borg. It became clear that Picard was still traumatized by his time in the collective and he got angry when Jurati suggested the isolated Borg on the Artifact might have changed. He retreated to his holographic study, where he had been researching the Borg Reclamation Project and its director, Hugh, a former Borg Picard had encountered decades earlier. In order to gain access to the Artifact, Picard asked Musiker to use her connection to Captain Emily Bosch to get him diplomatic credentials. Bosch made him a special envoy to the Reclamation Project, but the Romulans refused to let Sirena land and insisted Picard had to beam over alone. Once on board the cube, was plagued by more flashbacks until he was welcomed by Hugh, and the two had a heartfelt reunion. Hugh showed Picard around the Reclamation Project and explained his work and the plight of the xBs. He agreed to help Picard in finding Soji, but when they went to her quarters they found them empty and in disarray. At first, Hugh was unable to track Soji, leading Picard to guess someone might be keeping her hidden. Once Soji freed herself from the death trap Narek set for her, though, her signal reappeared and Hugh and Picard tracked her down. Although Picard told Soji he was a friend of her father's and her sister had come to Picard for help, she was hesitant to trust him. Ultimately, though, she believed him when he said he was trying to help her, and Picard, Hugh and Soji fled from the Romulans that were pursuing them to the queencell. Hugh activated the spatial trajector hidden in the cell to help Picard and Soji escape. When they were accosted by Romulan guards, Elnor came to the rescue, after having gained access to the Artifact despite Picard's orders to stay on La Sirena. Picard told Musiker and Rios he was going to take Soji to Nepenthe and they should rendezvous there. He ordered Elnor to come along, but Elnor refused, insisting he should cover Picard's escape. (PIC: "The Impossible Box")


Picard shares a moment with Riker

Upon arriving on Nepenthe, Picard and Soji were greeted by Kestra Troi-Riker, the daughter of William T. Riker and Deanna Troi. Kestra took the two visitors to the Riker residence, where Picard joyfully reunited with Deanna and Will. Picard explained the situation to them and they welcomed him and Soji to stay as long as they needed. During the visit, Picard spent time with his old friends, reminiscing about the Rikers' late son Thaddeus Troi-Riker and discussing Soji and his current mission. Initially, Picard did not want to give away the details, Will was able to guess that Soji was Data's daughter, and thus an android. At dinner, Deanna and Will helped Picard to convince Soji she could trust him, and Soji revealed how Narek had manipulated her into telling him about her homeworld. Going off the details she mentions and with the help of a friend, Kestra was able to identify the planet Soji was describing as Ghulion IV, and they all agreed Picard should get help from Starfleet and take Soji to her homeworld. (PIC: "Nepenthe")


Picard speaks with Soji about her past and Commander Data on board La Sirena.

After getting back to La Sirena and making introductions, Picard asked Rios to plot a course for Deep Space 12 and to get him a secure channel to Starfleet Command. In his holographic study, Picard spoke with Admiral Clancy about Soji and the other possible synths and asked for a squadron to travel to the Vayt sector. He proceeded to add arguments to his cause before Clancy bluntly shushed him, telling him that a squadron would meet him at DS12. After this, Picard spoke with Dr. Jurati in sickbay, where told her she would be turning herself in at DS12 for the murder of Bruce Maddox. Jurati told him about the mission Commodore Oh gave her and the Admonition, though Picard remained somewhat skeptical. Soon after, the crew gathered and, guided by Musiker, pieced together the truth about the Zhat Vash, the Attack on Mars, Commodore Oh, and the synths. Realizing she had given the Romulans the means to eradicate her people, Soji tried to hijack La Sirena and change their course to head directly for her homeworld and warn the synths there of the impending attack. Rios was able to regain control of the ship, but Picard agreed with Soji and tried to take command of Sirena himself. He was foiled when he was unable to work the ship's controls. Soji managed to convince Rios to help take her home, and together, they headed for the transwarp conduit that would take them to Ghulion IV. (PIC: "Broken Pieces")

"Death" and resurrection
Upon arriving on the synth homeworld of Coppelius, in which the La Sirena crashed on the surface, Jurati was able to discover the abnormality in Picard's brain, which he revealed to the rest of the crew as being diagnosed as terminal just before La Sirena left Earth. He made a point of saying he would not be treated like a dying man, and they would continue with the mission. As he had promised, he delivered Soji to her people at Coppelius Station, a community of synths led by Dr. Altan Soong, the son of Data's creator Noonian Soong. Picard and Soji told the assembled synths that the Romulans were en route to their world to destroy them. Picard sent a secure message to Starfleet informing them that he had made first contact and requested diplomatic negotiations and Starfleet protection for Coppelius and its inhabitants. The synth community, led by Sutra, had come to another conclusion: They had discovered that the "Admonition" that the Zhat Vash believed to be a warning against synthetics was in fact a message meant for synthetics, to call for help from a hidden race of advanced artificial lifeforms to preserve their existence… even if it meant exterminating organic life in the process. In order to stop him from trying to instill doubt in the others, Soong and Sutra ordered that Picard be held under house arrest. (PIC: "Et in Arcadia Ego, Part 1")

Picard was eventually rescued by Jurati, and the two of them traveled to the La Sirena; unbeknownst to them, the others had returned to Coppelius Station to stop the construction of the transmitter. Having learned the ship's controls from his observations of Rios, Picard was able to take the ship back into orbit and face down the Romulan fleet, led by Commodore Oh, now revealed as a Romulan general. A fleet of Starfleet ships, led by Riker aboard the USS Zheng He, arrived in response to Picard's transmission, informing the Romulans that Coppelius was under Federation protection. Picard pleaded on an open channel with Soji, who was working to build the transmitter, to not become the "Destroyer" that the Romulans believed her to be. Finally giving in, Soji destroyed the transmitter, leaving the Romulans no choice but to withdraw in the face of the overwhelming Starfleet force. With Coppelius saved, Picard collapsed, his body beginning to fail as the result of his illness. He was beamed to the planet's surface, where he died in the company of the crew he had led on this mission. Soong had been working to create a golem to transfer his consciousness into, and had just completed the work before the Romulans arrived; working with Jurati and Soji, Soong was able to transfer Picard's consciousness and memories into the golem before his brain functions ceased completely. (PIC: "Et in Arcadia Ego, Part 2")

With a second chance at life, he continued on with the crew of the La Sirena, noting along with Soji Asha that with the Federation's synthetic ban lifted, they were both free to travel as they pleased. Notably, the golem's neural net did not contain the defect in Picard's parietal lobe that caused the death of his Human body. The android body was built to be identical to his Human body in all other ways, lacking any enhanced physical or mental abilities and having the same remaining lifespan Picard's Human body would have had if not for his brain defect. (PIC: "Et in Arcadia Ego, Part 2")

Return to Starfleet

Picard chancelloring in 2401

By 2401, Picard was reinstated as an admiral in Starfleet, and appointed Chancellor of Starfleet Academy. He also continued to run Château Picard. At this time, Laris, Romulan refugee under his employ, made her feelings of affection known to him. Despite clearly having romantic feelings for her, Picard's sense of duty left him unable to reciprocate. When Picard suggested that nothing had to change between them following her confession, Laris responded that ruing would be awkward she was too old for awkward.

Shortly after giving the opening statement at Starfleet Academy, Picard was visited by Fleet Admiral Sally Whitley on a very sensitive matter. Whitley explained that an anomaly showed up in space, caused a large spike in Adler-Lasky temporal radiation, and then began to broadcast. She played the initial distorted broadcast, then filters it out to "help us, Picard". Whitley explained the transmission fell under Article 15, an entreaty to join the Federation and apparently, they only wished to speak to Picard about it. She held out a combadge for him, which he reluctantly accepted.

Picard boarded the USS Stargazer, now under Rios’s command, in order to initiate contact with the anomaly. When there was no reply to his hail, he tried again, only for a legion of voices to speak his name. Energy spikes caused the consoles and viewscreen to stutter and something began coming through the rift. Rios called for red alert and ordered the helm to give them distance. A massive vessel came through the rift and emitted a shock wave. It soon became apparent that the vessel was Borg. While Picard and others debated whether the Borg should be trusted, the Borg Queen, covered in metallic armor, arrived on the Stargazer and began to take control of the ship. In order to stop the Borg Queen from taking over the vessel, Picard called for the ship to self-destruct.

Suddenly, Picard found himself in an alternate timeline where the Federation had been replaced by a militaristic Confederation of Earth whose goal to eliminate all other life in the galaxy. He was then visited by Q who reminded Picard about the words that he said to him when they last parted ways, "the trial never ends." Q reminded Picard about how he had talked about second chances and told him that he was now at the "very end of the road not taken." (PIC: "The Star Gazer")

Picard soon discovered that he wasn’t alone in this timeline – Q had brought Rios, Agnes, Raffi, Elnor, and Seven as well. A captured Borg Queen, scheduled for execution, revealed that, since the Borg have insight into various timeline]s, she knew the when the timeline divergence occurred—the year 2024. After hooking up the Queen to the CSS La Sirena.

Thanks to a Watcher named Tallinn, Picard discovered that the focal point of the divergence was his ancestor, Renee Picard who was scheduled to depart on the Europa space mission. (PIC: "Watcher") Tallinn informed Picard that Renee suffered from debilitating bouts of depression, which reminded Picard of his own mother who suffered from the same condition. (PIC: "Monsters")

Ultimately, the entire scenario was Q’s effort to help Jean-Luc deal with the trauma of his mother’s suicide when he was a child. The timeline was restored, and Q sent the group, minus Rios, who elected to stay in 2024, back to the Stargazer just before Picard called for the self-destruct. He quickly realized that the mysterious Borg Queen was Agnes, who’d been assimilated by the Queen in 2024. Her intent was not malicious – it was to warn the Federation of the real threat the anomaly posed. Though the Queen knew how the anomaly could be defended against, she didn’t know the nature of the threat and asked for provisional membership in the Federation so that she could be "the guardian at the gate."

Picard returned to the Chateau and discovered that Laris arranged for the solarium to be restored to its former glory. She also began preparing to leave the chateau for good. Having come to understand the origin of his difficulties regarding long-term relationships, Picard admitted his foolish behavior and asked Laris for her forgiveness and a second chance. Laris agreed. (PIC: "Farewell")

Second Retirement

Picard's original body

Later that year, Picard retired from Starfleet again and made preparations to accompany Laris to Chaltok IV where she would be setting up diplomatic security. The plan changed when he received an encrypted message from Dr. Crusher, asking for him help. (PIC: "The Next Generation")

Subsequently, Picard was reunited with his old command crew on the USS Titan-A and discovered that Jack Crusher, the target of Vadic and a rogue faction of the Changelings, was actually his son.

Vadic had stolen Picard's body from where it was stored at Daystrom Station in order to extract a part of his brain. Ultimately, his body was destroyed along with the Shrike. (PIC: "The Bounty", "Surrender", "Võx")

Following the defeat of Vadic, it was discovered that, while Picard was Locutus of Borg, he had been genetically altered to be a Borg receiver which had resulted in Picard being able to hear the Borg Collective even without any implants. This had been misdiagnosed as Irumodic Syndrome and was what had actually killed him. Jack had inherited this genetic abnormality from Picard, but he had become a transmitter capable of communicating with the Collective. The Changelings used the abnormality, extracted from Picard's original body, to allow the Borg to take over Starfleet and begin the assimilation of the Federation, virtually unchallenged.

With the Titan-A falling under Borg control, Picard, Riker, Worf, Data, Deanna, Beverly and La Forge retreated to the Fleet Museum where La Forge revealed that he had secretly spent the last twenty years rebuilding the USS Enterprise-D, the saucer section of which had been recovered from Veridian III following its destruction due to the Prime Directive. With the Enterprise not linked into Starfleet's mainframe and thus unaffected by the Borg takeover, Picard resumed command of his old ship to once again fight the Borg, humorously accepting a field demotion to the rank of Captain after the Enterprise computer identified him as Captain Jean-Luc Picard, due to the long-outdated crew manifest. (PIC: "Võx")

Under Picard's leadership, the Enterprise engaged a Borg cube over Jupiter with Picard beaming aboard the Borg ship himself in order to save his son. Picard was confronted by his old enemy the Borg Queen who revealed that the Borg Collective had been decimated to the point of near destruction by the neurolytic pathogen spread by an alternate timeline version of Admiral Kathryn Janeway decades earlier (VOY: "Endgame") with the Queen's own cannibalism to survive, starvation and old age leaving the Borg as only the Queen, a handful of drones and a single cube. In an effort to save his son, Picard linked with Jack who eventually broke free as the Enterprise destroyed the cube. At the last moment, Deanna Troi was able to detect Riker's position, allowing the Enterprise to beam out Picard, Jack, Riker and Worf as the Borg cube exploded, ending the Borg once and for all and breaking their control over Starfleet. As a reward for saving the Federation, Picard and his crew all received full pardons for their criminal actions while Seven was promoted to the rank of Captain.

A year later, Picard and La Forge returned the Enterprise to the Fleet Museum and Picard, having returned to his retirement, enjoyed a drink and a game of poker with his old command crew at 10 Forward Avenue. Picard also accompanied Jack, now a Starfleet ensign, to his first assignment on the rechristened USS Enterprise-G, renamed in honor of Picard and his command crew. While on the Enterprise, Jack was visited by Q who revealed that while the trial of humanity was over for Picard, it had just begun for Jack. (PIC: "The Last Generation")

Legacy
By the 32nd century, Picard's personal files were still part of the Federation and Starfleet databases that survived the Burn. In 3189, the USS Discovery's Chief Science officer, Commander Michael Burnham, examined his files and saw his encounter with her brother Spock on Romulus. (DIS: "Unification III", "Terra Firma, Part 1"; TNG: "Unification II")

In 3190, Hugh Culber cited Picard's resurrection as the first successful implementation of the Soong Method when he was preparing to use it to provide Gray Tal with a new body. Following the success with Picard, there was a low success rate with other people and it was abandoned. (DIS: "Anomaly (DIS)")